---
layout: layout.njk
title: ///_hyperscript
---

{% include "docs-layout-start.md" %}

## Introduction

Hyperscript is a scripting language for doing front end web development.  It is designed to make it very easy to
respond to events and do simple DOM manipulation in code that is directly embedded on elements on a web page.

Here is a simple example of some hyperscript:

{% example %}
<button _="on click toggle .red on me">
  Click Me
</button>
{% endexample %}

<style>
  .red {
    background: rgba(255,0,0,0.48) !important;
  }
</style>

The first thing to notice is that hyperscript is defined *directly on the button*, using the `_` (underscore) attribute.

Embedding code directly on the button like this might seem strange at first, but hyperscript is one of a growing number
of technologies that de-emphasize [Separation of Concerns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_concerns)
in favor of [Locality of Behavior](https://htmx.org/essays/locality-of-behaviour/).

Other examples of libraries going this direction are [Tailwind CSS](https://tailwindcss.com/),
[AlpineJS](https://alpinejs.dev) and [htmx](https://htmx.org).

The next thing you will notice about hyperscript is its syntax, which is very different than most programming languages
used today. Hyperscript is part of the [xTalk](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XTalk) family of scripting languages, which
ultimately derive from [HyperTalk](https://hypercard.org/HyperTalk%20Reference%202.4.pdf).  These languages all read more
like english than the programming languages you are probably used to.

This unusual syntax has advantages, once you get over the initial shock:

* It is very distinctive, making it obvious when hyperscript is being used in a web page
* It is very easy to read, making it obvious what a script is doing

Hyperscript favors read time over write time when it comes to code. It can be a bit tricky to write at first
for some people who are used to other programming languages, but it reads very clearly once you are done.

Code is typically read many more times than it is written, so this tradeoff is a good one for simple
front end scripting needs.

Below you will find an overview of the various features, commands and expressions in hyperscript, as well as links to
more detailed treatments of each them.

Some other hyperscript resources you may want to check out are:

 * The [cookbook](/cookbook) for existing hyperscripts you can start using and modifying for your own needs.
 * The [VanillaJS/jQuery/hyperscript comparison](/comparison), which shows the differences between vanillajs, jQuery
   and hyperscript implementations of various common UI patterns
 * Syntax highlighting for [VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=dz4k.vscode-hyperscript-org) or [Sublime](https://packagecontrol.io/packages/Hyperscript)

OK, let's get started with hyperscript!

## Install & Quick Start {#install}

Hyperscript is a dependency-free JavaScript library that can be included in a web page without any build step:

  ~~~ html
  <script src="https://unpkg.com/hyperscript.org"></script>
  ~~~

If you are using a build step:

  ~~~ js
  import 'hyperscript.org';
  ~~~

After you've done this, you can begin adding hyperscript to elements:

  ~~~ html
  <div _="on click call alert('You clicked me!')">
    Click Me!
  </div>
  ~~~

You can also add hyperscript within script tags that are denoted as `text/hyperscript`:

  ~~~ html
  <script type="text/hyperscript">
    on mousedown
      halt the event -- prevent text selection...
      -- do other stuff...
    end
  </script>
  ~~~

Features defined in script tags will apply to the `body`.

Hyperscript has an open, pluggable grammar & some advanced features do not ship by default (e.g. [workers](#workers)).

To use a feature like workers you can install the extension directly by including `/dist/ext/worker.js` after you
include hyperscript.

If your HTML is received via AJAX or generated by scripts after initial page load, you need to call 
`_hyperscript.process()` to process the scripts on the new elements.

  ~~~ js
  element.appendChild(newContent);
  _hyperscript.process(newContent);
  ~~~

You can also call it from hyperscript itself

  ~~~ hyperscript
  call _hyperscript.process(#new_element_id)
  ~~~

Elements added by the [`put`](/commands/put) command are processed automatically; no need to call this function.
[`Htmx`](https://htmx.org) does the same for all processed fragments.


<div class="docs-page-nav">
<a href="/docs/" class="prev"><svg viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2"><path d="M12 19V5m-7 7l7-7 7 7"/></svg> <strong>Docs Home</strong></a>
<a href="/docs/language/" class="next"><strong>Language</strong> <svg viewBox="0 0 24 24" fill="none" stroke="currentColor" stroke-width="2"><path d="M9 5l7 7-7 7"/></svg></a>
</div>

</div></div>
